Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Location Swickert Office Market House in Canton Cardiff.
And the date today is Monday the 21st of September.
John, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full for the record?
Right, okay.
I'm well known as John from young school age, but my Indian name is Rajinder Singh,
which is spelled R-A-J-I-N-D-E-R and surname Singh S-I-N-G-H.
Raj, would you be kind enough to do the same?
Yep, most definitely. Mine is spelled R-A-J-A, surname Singh S-I-N-G-H.
For listeners in the future, I'll point out from the onset that of course John and Raj are father and son.
So the dynamic duo, as I like to think of you both.
When do you first remember getting involved in Carnival, Cardiff Carnival?
Well, many years it's been from what I can remember.
From I think at least about say, I remember overall, it's been about say 20 odd years.
Yeah, 20 years.
Or 20 odd years from what I can remember. I can't remember exact dates.
But I remember it was over 20 years ago.
So from seeing many other Carnivals and then saw a Carnival here and then working with Bhangra
and then just seeing a great development in Carnival. So I'll put a light to it.
I remember myself, I actually have a picture going back about 20 years ago when I was about 6, 7 years old.
Taking part in the mass Carnival. So yeah, most definitely it's been a good 20 years.
Is this a picture where perhaps as part of your fantastic Bhangra performance on Parade,
you actually ended up on the shoulders of your father?
Because I have a picture which again we'll be putting online in the archive
where having performed a number of acrobatic moves, you then got on top of John's shoulders
and you appear to be going down the haze at the time, which I thought was rather wonderful, like an acrobat.
That wasn't that, the picture I have is not that specific one.
However, yeah, I'm sure it is some of that kind as well. We've got loads. I've got some doing sword fighting as well.
I remember when I was a youngster doing the Carnival, drumming, dancing, as we've done so many different things in the Carnival.
For those who don't know, Bhangra, what is it? Where does it come from? How did it arrive here in Cardiff in Wales?
Originally stems from India. It's celebrated during the harvest periods.
This is where it originates from a long, long time ago.
However, bringing it to Cardiff, I suppose my dad can answer that more better than myself.
Over to you, John.
As my son speaks, he's quite right.
The start of it really started from the Saki time, which is very known around the world, especially in India at the harvest time.
And as my father, when he came over from India in 1963, 64, he came over and as they used to do it there, they done it here as well with a few of their cousins and colleagues.
And from there, there was a very, very few artists in the Asian community.
And from what I recall, what my father said, there was only one in Scotland as a Bhangra dancer and one of them.
And everywhere where they went, they did a really nice show.
And one of the famous places they did, which was in London, is it the...
Not the Palladium, it's another one, which is a very famous one, which I can't remember.
Anyway, they've done it there and they really, really liked it.
And from there, we, as he got older and then we took over and from we taking over, now the third generation is taking over, which is my son.
But it's been very colourful and very sort of nice to do carnivals as well in a very diplomatic way, different, different workshops, different things.
And it's been very enjoyable.
Carnival, particularly when it's on the road and we're there with our big audiences, we need music to dance to, to power us on.
It's like the fuel in our engine.
And you guys and your family and friends and your colleagues have provided that with a very special instrument called the dhol.
Can you tell us a bit more about the dhol and what it is and what makes it so wonderful for...
I mean, you know, I don't want to give it away.
Over to you guys. You're the experts.
So the dhol is part of Indian percussion as well.
A family of approximately four or five other drums.
But the dhol is used during all celebrations periods.
Most importantly, Vasaki, Harvest Time, as we originally stated.
This is a very loud instrument played with two sticks.
It's approximately a metre and a half big, long, shall I say, carried on the shoulders with a strap.
It's very, very loud.
So you can imagine five to ten of them being played at one time.
And it's for people to dance to, Bhangra dancers or what have you, which is which matches that.
I've always enjoyed the spirit, the rhythm, the enthusiasm of Bhangra, particularly in the carnival context, but in any context.
There are also a number of, what shall I say, exclamations and chants that to my mind go with the Bhangra experience.
And now is my chance to finally learn. What exactly does the phrase Haripa mean?
It's Haripa, I suppose. It's a difficult one.
It's because there's numerous different translations.
Please give us a few.
Mine would be, I would assume, I would say it means joy, if you wish, joy.
Any other examples you can give?
Definitely.
Yes, my speech is when you are very jolly and you want to shout out loud that you're having some fun.
Got it.
So the Bhangra, when the music actually hits to the rhythm on your feet and the brain, you just want to yell out, I'm having some fun.
It's similar as when people are dancing, say, in the Western world and they say, hey, ho.
Got it. It's brilliant.
I mean, again, when you guys are performing, you shout that.
I have a tendency to shout it as well, you know, because it raises the atmosphere, doesn't it?
Adding on to what my dad said earlier about you bringing Bhangra into Cardiff and what have you.
One thing my dad didn't mention is he actually used to teach as well in schools.
So from obviously after my grandfather and what have you, once they passed it on to my dad's generation, my dad then took it into schools.
And it started to get recognised quite a lot more as an instrument.
Obviously, going back over 20, 25, 30 years ago, even, you can imagine how many people didn't know what the dhol was.
What's the difference between a dhol and a dholki?
Dholki is played by hands and that's a very, it's a smaller instrument.
I thought it was a smaller version.
Yeah, it's about half a metre in size.
Got it.
And then the schools, it was in the Key Stage 3, which was very important that a lot of people do some sort of, especially in the Asian, there was not a lot of instruments in the Asian.
Creative skill.
And for the other people to give the opportunity for them to play that instrument as well as all the other instruments.
I remember going to see one performance that you taught the children at Nenian Park Junior School.
And it was wonderful.
And as you say, there were children of Asian origin, or background there, but there were children, you know, from every shape and size, every creed and colour, and they were all into it so much, which is fantastic.
Of course Bhangra, as well as being a music form, is a dance form as well.
Can you tell us a little bit about some of the different shapes you pull and some of the, you know, okay, let me say, I've never seen such a wonderful, dramatic, collective dance moves.
I mean, the chariot moves.
Give us some insight into the physical fitness required for this and some of the shapes.
Yeah, you most definitely have to be fit and you've described it very, very well.
It's something of a lot of physical demanding moves.
It's very colourful, very bright.
A lot of the moves that are displayed in a form of Bhangra dance actually signify the harvest time.
So for example, have you probably seen the sort of snappy sort of stick thing?
Absolutely.
That's cutting the crops.
So that's actually what they used to do to cut the crops, but we've turned them into moves.
Again, it's signifying, remembering what we've done during this harvest time.
I say we, my ancestors, during the harvest period.
So those sort of moves.
And then obviously they've added to more acrobatic style stuff like making pyramids out of 10, 15 people or what have you.
Fantastic.
So that is very colourful, very bright as well.
It's always been the intention for Cardiff Cardiff of all to reflect the multicultural nature of Cardiff.
And certainly when the Duaul's been beating out its fabulous rhythm, the Bhangra dancers have been there.
What kind of reaction can you remember getting from the wider population as you come through the streets or in the city centre?
Or indeed when we used to stage Cardiff mass carnival as it was down the bay.
What can you remember about what?
Yes. What was people's reactions like?
It's a really energetic instrument.
So it definitely brings out the energy in people.
You hear loads of chants, loads of screaming, loads of clapping.
That's the sort of thing, because it's definitely something.
It's not something you walk by.
It's a percussion. It's similar to the steel pans.
It's got so much rhythm in the actual instrument.
It just brings out the energy in you.
When the actual instrument is played, as soon as it's played, the Duaul.
And they will stop and listen to it that split second because it's so loud and it's so enjoyable listening to a different instrument.
And they want to learn more to see how it's played.
As you mentioned, it was your father who helped bring this wonderful art form to Wales.
You then picked up the baton and now we turn to the younger generation, Thiraj.
Am I right in thinking that, I mean, let's be honest, just before we start the interview, you have in fact been teaching Duaul today.
Yeah. Now, as you mentioned, with the acknowledgement of the instrument and you can even say the genre of music has become very famous.
A lot of people are learning of numerous ethnicities.
So I have approximately 12 to 15 students at the moment, ranging from kids that are four and five, that are white, British, Welsh, Muslim, Hindu.
I even have a doctor from Italia that comes from Bristol.
Where are they sourcing the instruments?
I remember at one point, certainly, is it Bina Arts in Southall was a place that people used to go?
Bina used to be very, very big.
Back in the day, back in the day.
Bina is still there. Jazz is probably the most famous now, jazz musicals.
However, as we move into the 21st century and with internet, people are now sourcing direct from the horse's mouth, shall we say.
So from India themselves. So we're jazz musicals. We're charging you X amount.
Say, for example, just to use as an example, a hundred pound for a drum.
They're now going there and picking them up for 10 percent off the price.
Fantastic. The skins. What are the skins made of?
The base side, because you've got one heavy duty skin and one thin skin.
The heavy duty one is actually sheepskin.
So obviously you can hit that as hard as you want.
It's not really ripping unless your intention is to.
And then the other side is a thin plastic.
And the sense of tuning the drum. Is that difficult?
Is it obviously, you know, bound with ropes?
That's exactly it. So originally it was only done with rope.
So both sides was done with rope.
But as we move forward into the 21st century, if you wish, they started to change them to nut and bolt.
So it's a lot more easier to control.
Some people do both with nut and bolt, but it's not very common because the base side, you don't get the same sound as doing it with rope.
So people have rope on the base side still that you can tighten and loosen after every performance.
And then you've got the nut and bolt to do the treble side.
Got it. Got it. I think, you know, obviously one thinks of seeks and seekers and warrior, warrior cast and spirituality.
But also, I have to say a certain sense of entrepreneurship.
I mean, I know John has several businesses.
And again, before we started the interview, Raj, you were mentioning that you're well, what can I say?
Collaborating financially and in a business sense with people even farther afield.
Would you care to just give us a little taste of your business acumen and where you're focused at the moment?
Yes. So following again in my parents' footsteps, I've always been in and around businesses, day off school, weekends, bank holidays.
My dad's taken me to the markets and what have you.
So I've always been streetwise, shall we say.
And then following that, I've been lucky enough to be put through education, do my degree, do my masters and what have you, which has then led upon building a few small businesses.
Obviously the entertainment company, which I've taken over from my dad and my grandfather, where originally that was just dancers.
We now do the full entertainment packages going into wedding event management as well now.
Dance floors, DJs, drummers, singers, jazz players, you name it, PA hire.
That's the entertainment side of technology company based in China, property companies based in India and in the UK.
So, yeah, loads of little things that's keeping us busy and out of trouble.
John and Raj, thank you so much for that insight, not mainly into the role of the dole and bungering, part of Carnival,
but some wider insight into Sikhism in Wales and quite clearly we're sitting next to what is going to be, I'm sure, someone who's going to be a future Young Businessman of the Year or Businessman of the Year.
Thank you very much indeed.
And well, I hope that those in the future who get to listen to this enjoy it as much as I have.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Excellent.